Welcome... to another episode of Shiloh Creek....Where the water runs slow, the friends look out for each other, and every story starts here — pondside — with me.
I'm Old Timber....The elephant elder....And today's story... is the morning the smallest berry harvest in twelve summers... brought every friend in the meadow to one tiny patch... and made them ask each other a hard, small question.
Today... I want to ask you something, my friends....A question Jesus once asked his friends, in a story from the Bible....What does it mean... to be generous?...Especially when there isn't very much....Especially when you wanted some too....Listen carefully....The answer is in the story.
Now... gather round, friends. Come close by the pond.
[excited] Old Timber!...Old Timber!...Is this the BERRY one?...The one where we get the BERRIES?
Mm....Yes, Bongo....It is the berry one....Settle in.
Now... settle in....Here we go.
Now, this was a couple of weeks back, on a bright soft morning in late summer when the sun was warm on the top of the leaves and the air smelled the way air smells when wild thyme has been crushed by paws and hooves and small wet feet, all morning, all going to the same place.
And the place they were all going to,...was the berry patch....A small patch of wild berries that grows on the south side of the meadow,...near the path,...just where it bends toward the creek....A patch the friends look forward to all spring....A patch that, most summers, gives them more than they can pick.
But not this morning....This morning,...the friends arrived to find that the berry patch...was very nearly empty....A few here....A small handful there....And the sun was warm,...and the leaves smelled sweet,...and there were six friends and one tortoise on the way and...not very many berries at all.
And down at the pond end,...where the Mudpuppies have their puddle — the big new puddle, that some of you may remember from a different morning a couple of weeks before — the Mudpuppies were not at the berry patch at all....They were not invited....They have never been invited....They eat what they fish out of the pond, mostly....And they do not, as a rule, expect berries.
Now, this is where things got interesting...
And over hopped Bongo the bear cub, with his usual cheerful crash — paws first, questions later — and he took one long look at the small few berries on the patch... and he said,
[excited]...Oh....Oh no....Oh — there are like four berries....Where are the BERRIES?...The patch is — where did all the BERRIES go?
And Zippy the hummingbird darted in, going so fast she was three places at once....She squeaked,
[excited] Friends!...Okay — I have ALREADY counted them — there are seventeen berries — and there are SIX of us — that's two-point-eight berries per friend — wait — point-eight is a problem — we cannot give somebody point-eight of a berry — alright — I propose — I propose — a fair-share algorithm based on body weight — Bongo is largest, so Bongo gets — wait — that's the OPPOSITE of fair — alright — let me start again —
And high in the branches of the big old oak, Garingo the parrot was already settled with the air of a creature with NOTHING ELSE TO DO and ALL OF HIS FEATHERS AVAILABLE....He called down — graciously — theatrically —
BEHOLD!...The patch....The very PATCH....Where, in finer years, the BERRIES did flow — RIPE, and PLUMP, and FREELY OFFERED —...is, this morning,...a little thin.
And at the edge of the patch,...quiet and steady, the way she has been since the storm,...was Fern the fawn,...with the warm light of the late-summer sun on her back....She had come for berries too....She did not say so first.
...Hello, friends....The patch is quiet today.
[excited]...Friend....I am — I am going to be HONEST with you....I have been waiting for berries...since SPRING.
...As have I, Bongo....As. Have. I....From up HERE....Where I have OBSERVED the patch's progress all summer....And let me say...we have all been very patient.
[excited] Alright — Bongo — listen — I have it — I have a NEW algorithm — proportional to TIME-WAITED — Bongo waited since spring — that's the longest — Bongo, in the new algorithm, you get — you get — eight berries — wait — wait — that's MORE than the entire harvest of any one friend's fair share — oh — oh no — the algorithm is broken again —
[excited]...Zippy....I am NOT EATING all the berries....I am DEFINITELY not going to....I — I am just — looking at them....From here....From up close....With my paws very near them.
And — yes — that is the sound of a bear cub trying very hard,...with all of his bear-cub heart,...not to eat the berries he came for....And the friends watched him,...gently,...for a long, kind moment.
And from the meadow path,...slow as ever,...arrived Shelly the tortoise — wise old Shelly....She had taken her time getting there, because Shelly takes her time, but in one of her front paws,...held very carefully,...like a small jewel,...was — exactly — one berry.
...Mm....I picked one....I picked one... on the way....I thought... we might be short.
...Shelly....That's...a lovely one.
...A SINGULAR berry....A — a single berry, brought all the way from where she started, to where we are....That is, I should say,...the very PORTRAIT of foresight....Bless that small berry.
[excited] Wait — wait — Shelly's berry — does Shelly's berry go INTO the harvest count?...Or is it a separate — a separate Shelly-contribution category?...Eighteen berries divided by six — that's three exactly — that's a CLEAN number — friends — I am — I am SO close to having a workable algorithm —
Mm....Now, friends... I have been listening....And counting too....And I have to tell you — you have all forgotten somebody.
Now... that is the moment I did something I have not done in a long while....I left my pondside willow,...where I tell you all these stories,...and I walked over.
Across the warm grass,...past the path bend,...slow,...the way an old elephant walks,...to where the friends stood at the small patch.
[excited]...Old Timber!...Old Timber — you're DOWN here....You're not... you're not pondside....You're — you're with US.
Mm....Yes, Bongo....I am....And — I am going to tell you a small thing about a berry patch I knew a very long time ago.
When I was a much younger elephant,...travelling, before I settled here,...there was a season — one summer — when the berries where I lived...did not grow at all....Not a single one....Not even small ones....Not even hard green ones....Just leaves.
And what I remember,...is that the elder elephants where I lived...took the little they had,...and gave half of it...to the smaller creatures that had nothing....The ones the harvest had not been counted for....The ones nobody had thought of.
Mm....And I thought of that this morning....Watching you all do your counting....I remembered a line from the Bible too,...about giving....About what giving does, exactly....But I'll come back to that line later.
...Old Timber.
...What if...the small creatures...were the Mudpuppies?...They were not at the patch....They are not... at the patch....What if we gave them...some?
[excited]...Fern....The Mudpuppies?...The Mudpuppies, Fern?
...Yes....They were not counting on any....Which is why...giving some... would be giving.
...Mm....Fern's right....The Mudpuppies are not at the patch....They have not been at the patch....They will not be at the patch tomorrow.
...The MUDPUPPIES.....I — I have OBSERVED them, of course....From up here....They are — they are creatures of the pond....They are...damp creatures....I had not, perhaps, thought of berries...for them.
[excited] Friends — wait — okay — alright — I have to do the math again — eighteen berries — divided among NINE — that's two each — that's actually a CLEANER number than three each — friends — the math LIKES sharing with the Mudpuppies — alright — I am IN.
[excited]...Friends....I am — I am going to tell you the truth....I was — I was scared....I was scared there wouldn't be enough....For me....I was — I was scared I'd waited since spring for nothing.
[excited]...And now I — I think I am going to give some of mine....I am going to give some of mine...to the Mudpuppies....Who were not counting on any.
...Bongo.....That's...a brave thing.
Mm....It is, my friends....And the rest of us — Garingo, Shelly, Zippy, Fern, and one elder elephant... — we are going to do the same.
And so the friends took the small few berries — Shelly's one careful one,...and Zippy's count of seventeen,...and the elder's share that I was going to take —...and we sorted them gently into two small piles....One for the six of us....And one for the Mudpuppies down at the pond end....And we walked, slow, the way an old elephant walks,...over to the puddle.
And there — sitting on their puddle's edge, sun-warmed and damp, as they are — were the Mudpuppies....And they had not seen any of this....And they did not know.
FRIENDS!...DOWN HERE AT THE POND END!...WHAT IS HAPPENING!...DID SOMETHING HAPPEN!
...Hello, Splosh....Splash....Splish....We brought you some berries.
Wait....Wait!...For US?
FOR US?
FOR US?...FOR THE MUDPUPPIES?...WE GET BERRIES?...WE ARE — WE ARE BERRY-RECEIVERS NOW?
Yes, friends....You are berry-receivers, this morning....Just for today....Here you are.
[excited]...Friends....Look....I — I think I feel...less hungry.....Even though I haven't eaten anything yet.
...Mm....A small berry given....A whole feeling.
Now... after all that —...once the berries had been quietly shared,...once Bongo had eaten his two with the slowness of somebody who suddenly knows the value of a berry,...once the Mudpuppies had announced they were Berry-Receivers six more times —...we sat down together at the pond's edge,...where I usually sit,...and we looked out over the water.
And I asked them — friends, what do you think it was, in the end, that made it work?
...I think...it was that we counted the ones who weren't there....The Mudpuppies didn't expect any....So when we gave them some...it felt... bigger.
[excited]...I think...I think it was that...I was scared first....And then I gave....And the scared part went away....Like it had been waiting for the giving.
[excited]...I think...I think it was the math....Honestly....Nine is — nine is a CLEANER number than six....But also — sharing with the Mudpuppies made the math FEEL different....I — I don't think I have a formula for that one yet.
...I think...I think it was that...the smallest one knew the answer first....Again.....And I, who was, after all, OBSERVING from up high,...did not.
...Mm....Generosity is when you give to somebody...who is not keeping a list either.
Mm....Now... isn't that something?...Funny how it took the smallest harvest in twelve summers... for them to remember the friends nobody was counting on.....And funny how the elder of all of us....left his willow today.....First time in a long while.
And that, my friends, is how I remember it....The morning of the smallest berry harvest in twelve summers....When seventeen berries became eighteen — Shelly's one too —...and eighteen berries...went round nine friends...instead of six....And nobody felt smaller for the giving.
Now, before you go —...the professor Hoot — has something he very much wants to tell you....About berries....He has — well —...we'll see what he has, won't we....The dear earnest creature.
...Ahem....Ahem ahem....Children...gather round....Today, a fact known to be...unequivocally....fascinating.
Today's...topic....The berry.
The berry,...children,...is a small,...round,...fruiting body....It contains, inside its small round shape,...the seeds...of FUTURE BERRIES....The berry,...you see,...is the meal AND the next meadow,...packaged together.
Now....As we all know....A berry contains....A....A....What was I saying?
...Ah....Yes....I was saying — children — that...the berry...is...interesting....Most berries...are not...the same as other berries....For example,...the blackberry...is a berry that is black....Whereas the blueberry...is a berry...that is blue....I have observed this many times.
Now....A FASCINATING FACT....For my attentive young listeners....Did you know...that...somewhere....up in the trees....is a NEST....And inside the nest...is a — a SMALL EGG....Wait.....That is not...about berries.
Ahem....I — I shall return to the topic....The BERRY....The berry, children, is a fine fruit....A noble fruit....A...generous fruit.
Generous,...you see,...because the berry...gives itself...to whoever picks it does not...keep itself....The berry,...one might say,...does not keep score.
Ahem....I — I shall stop there....I appear...to have said...a true thing....Class dismissed.
...Mm....Well....The dear earnest creature....He got there, in his way....The berry does not keep score....That's actually rather fine....I'll take it.
[excited] Old Timber —...what did we learn today?
Mm....We learned, my friends... that being generous is when there isn't very much,...and you give some anyway....Especially to the friends nobody is counting on....That's all generous is....Just — giving when nobody is keeping score....On either side.
And there's a line from the Bible, my friends....From the gospel of Luke —...the words Jesus said about giving....Give, and it shall be given unto you....Good measure,...pressed down,...and shaken together,...and running over....Which is just a way of saying —...when you give a little,...what comes back is more than what you started with.
And that's what the friends did this morning....The harvest was small....Each of us had less....But each of us, somehow,...had more....Because we gave to the friends nobody was counting on.....And that, my friends,...is generosity.
[excited]...Old Timber?...What does that LOOK like?...In an actual day?...For somebody who is listening right now?
Mm....Well, friend,...this week,...if you and somebody you know each have something —...a crayon to share,...a turn on the swing,...a marble,...a stick you found that's just right —...try splitting yours in half....Not because you want anything back....Not to keep score....Not to see what they'll do....Just because you have, and they don't —...and that's how friends look out for each other....The Bible says when you give like that — freely, without counting —...the joy comes back to fill you up....But that's not why you do it....You do it because they needed it,...and you had it,...and that was enough.
Until the next breeze brings us together, my friends....Be generous out there.
See you next time... somewhere in Shiloh Creek.